God does love us and Jesus did die for us.
And if you take nothing away from this service, I think that's enough.
As we get going here, we are just a few days into the season of Lent for those who participate.
Lent is a 40-day window in which we prepare ourselves and maybe the soil of our souls for Easter.
for resurrection, for new life, for that which pops out of the ground.
Over the coming weeks, you're going to hear a lot of gardening metaphors, so just get ready for that.
You probably might even learn some things about how to garden your actual like physical gardens, so you're welcome in advance.
I don't know a ton, everything I've learned.
I've learned from Betty and Paula, and yet I will pass along a few things to you as well, because I actually think that what is happening in the physical world outside has a reflection, direct reflection,
on what's happening inside of our hearts and souls.
God has created this world wonderfully and within it lies the mysteries of what he's trying to do with each and every one of us.
And so of the course of the next few weeks, I look forward to exploring some of this together.
The sermon ahead is very quickly understood with two facts.
And then one challenge, because I think that's what sermons are supposed to do at the end, is offer a challenge.
Fact one, God, the great sower of seeds is showering your life with seeds.
This very second, God is showering your life in this second right now, the moment you are in with his seeds.
Fact number two, these seeds, however, must be received with the right kind of soil.
And the challenge is that Jesus is asking you to consider what kind of soil is sitting in your heart right now.
Is it compact?
Is it rocky?
Is it thorny?
Or is it good soil?
Before we begin, let us pray.
Our Father in heaven, we come this morning seeking a word.
The good news, Lord, is that Jesus teaches us that you are the sower of words and that you are constantly throwing those seeds out before us.
And so God today, soften our hearts, soften that soil that we might hear from you.
In Christ's name we pray, amen.
If you'll turn with me, we'll just read the first nine verses of our passage today.
It's the original parable that he tells.
The whole passage goes like this.
There's the parable, which is verses one through nine.
There's this intermediate section in which he tells us why he talks in parables, which, if you've not thought about, is worthy of its own sermon or sermon series, maybe even, which is the fact that Jesus
doesn't talk in like law.
Have you noticed this?
He talks in storytelling.
He speaks in parables.
He speaks in terms of like metaphors and analogies.
Well, sometimes we might wish that he were a little more straightforward, but instead we get stories about sowers, sowing seeds, right?
And this is who Jesus is and why he teaches us, but it's worth reflecting.
Why would God?
When God comes in the flesh, why would he speak so cryptically?
Why not just be a little more straightforward?
That's a different sermon.
And then in the last part of the sermon, he explains the parable, which is the only time in Scripture that he gives us a reading and explanation of his parable.
And so that too is worthy of your time and reflection and much of what I say is going to reflect that.
But for right now, we're just gonna read again the parable itself versus one to nine.
Again, he began teaching beside the sea and a very large crowd gathered about him so that he got into a boat and sat in it on the sea and the whole crowd was beside the sea on the land.
And he was teaching them many things in parables
And in his teaching, he said to them, listen, behold.
A sewer went out to sow, and as he sowed, some seed fell along the path, and the birds came, and they devoured it.
Other seed fell on rocky ground, where it did not have much soil, and immediately it sprang up, since it had no depth of soil.
And when the sun rose, it was scorched, and since it had no root, it withered away.
Other seed fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it, and it yielded no grain.
And other seeds fell into good soil and produced grain, growing up and increasing and yielding 30-fold, 60-fold, 100-fold.
And he said, he who has ears let him hear.
We've got four kinds of soil, right?
We've got what?
The path.
which is compacted, people have been walking along it, and you can imagine the seed falls onto the path, and what happens, nothing.
And then there is, what's next?
Bang attention, there's the rocky soil, right?
Here I envision like, not just like boulders or something, but like maybe little pebbles even.
Like imagine a layer of soil that's like filled with all these little pebbles in it, and it only goes so deep, and the plant tries to root down in it, but there's only so much soil to go around, and it's not enough to create a good, healthy root structure.
And number three, what was the third one?
The thorns, thank you, Asher.
The thorns, well, this time, it seems,
The crop starts to try to produce something, but the thorns choke it out, and it's not nearly as productive as it should be, if it's productive at all.
And then lastly, of course, we have the good soil.
And what happens with the good soil?
We get 30x, 60x, 100 times of what was expected.
Now you and I were aiming for the good soil.
And so the question is, well, what is that?
What's the good soil?
We'll get there.
Before we do, it's important to say a couple things.
One, I find it odd that this sower, if he knows what he's doing, is putting seed in places like the path or the thorns or wherever.
It'd be a little bit like, well, me,
if I were trying to grow grass seed in my backyard and sometimes I have and I take handfuls of seeds and I just walk around and I just start throwing it anywhere.
And suddenly it's on my patio, suddenly it's under the trees where it's not gonna grow, suddenly it's in this group of rocks that are near my shed where I don't want it to grow.
Right, that is not normal for how you might seed a certain area.
But this gets to a broader point, which is to say that it's not normal because me, the sower, I have limited amounts of grass seed.
And if you know anything about grass seed, it's rather expensive, actually.
And so you don't want to waste it.
You don't want to just throw it anywhere.
You want to be very specific.
But God, the great sower, God has endless seeds.
His word,
is endless, and he is willing to throw it out all the time and at any moment.
And so what you need to know is that God is throwing seeds in great abundance into your life at any and all points.
And it doesn't matter if it's rocky, it doesn't matter if you're on the path, it doesn't matter if it's good or soil or thorny, whatever it is.
God is throwing seeds.
In hopes that you are amending the soil of your life, that you might be able to receive it and hear what God is doing in you and through you, for you, with you.
As we've already said, there are four soils, but there is just one field
And I actually think that in some ways, this is representative of all of us.
There's just one me.
But I certainly have within me various parts of my life that represent each of these.
All four of these.
The hope, of course, is that my good soil is a much larger patch than the rocky or the thorny.
Truth be told, like, the garden of my life is vast.
And there are parts of it that need tending.
And some of it is rocky.
And it's time to get in there and to do some work.
And so over the course of the next four weeks, we're actually going to stick with this one parable, or at least the ideas behind it, and then ask ourselves, what would rocky soil look like in real life, like in your real life?
And if it's in there, how do I get that out?
How do I dig around enough to change that kind of soil?
And then in the fourth week, we'll talk about what it means to have healthy soil, and to have that really dark, rich, nutrient-filled soil that's capable of growing the kind of thing that God is trying to grow in our lives.
There's another fact about this nice parable and nice metaphor that God has given us in the parable, which is that while it might seem like the soil of your life just is your life, right?
That the path is just always the path and that the rocky soil is just always the rocky.
If you're a gardener in the room, you know that's not necessarily true.
There are ways to amend your soil, to actually change it so that it is conducive to God's work in your life.
We've been talking a lot about transformation around here.
There's a reason you can change.
Your life as it is right now is not your destiny.
You can be a different person in six months, a year, 10 years from now.
God can and wants to do a work in each and every one of you, every last one of you.
And the question is, will I do the work internally amend the soil of my soul so that God is able to do that work in there?
As I've already said, Betty and Paula have taught me a few things already about the way soil works and gardening works.
And there's just two right now I kind of want to give to you.
One is it requires like actual labor.
It doesn't just happen of its own accord.
In order to be somebody who amends their garden, the soil, you got to dig down in and you got to get the dirt under the fingernails.
And you got to actually do the work, right?
Paula taught me that every year she and art, they go to the Lorton dump.
and he backs up and they dump a bunch of leaf mulch, old leaf mulch into the truck and then they drive it to her house and then they lay that leaf mulch everywhere.
And why?
Well, because it's filled with the nutrients and it takes a lot of work and they're putting it all over the yard.
But if you've ever been to her house and you've seen her yard,
If you were like dig down, I mean, it's some of the most nutrient-rich soil that's probably in existence in Northern Virginia, because every year, she just puts this stuff in her grass, right?
And it's not actually in her plants, it's everywhere.
And you wonder, like, well, how does she get her health so beautiful?
How does she make her yard look so nice?
It's not by accident.
There's intention behind it.
It takes work.
She lays the nutrients down.
She feeds it.
But then the second part is maybe of equal importance, and it's an expectation setting.
I can't remember who it was that taught me this, but that when you plant something,
It takes actually like three or so years to really start doing what it's supposed to be doing.
And the phrase goes like this, in the first year it sleeps, the second year it creeps, the third year it leaps, sleep, creep, and then leap, right?
Has anyone heard this?
Who knows this?
Yeah.
So this is not all that different from how transformation works in your actual life.
Like if you want to be somebody who is changed, my guess is all of that hard work of like laying down the nutrient-rich soil, like that in year one is going to take a ton of work and you're probably not going to see the immediate result of it like that year because the plant of your soul is going to sleep.
It's going to take time to get the roots really dug down deep.
And so my encouragement would be
Take the time it takes.
Don't give up too soon.
Keep the digging.
Because then in the second year, it starts to creep.
And you start to realize, oh, things are a little different.
Things are changing.
I'm noticing the growth that I just didn't notice before.
And then in the third year, then you see the leap, right?
And you realize, oh, whoa.
Something is actually really different here.
That's at least the way the natural world works.
But what works in here?
Well, I actually think it's kind of similar.
It takes a while to really change, to become someone new.
Sometimes, I will say, sometimes it happens overnight.
And there are those experiences that change you forever.
That's real.
Like these things do happen, but the kind of change we're talking about here, sanctification, transformation, these things take, I've always said like a lifetime, but the work that you're doing, it might even take three years, two years, one year, to take the time it takes.
It is important to say, lest you misunderstand what we're talking about here.
It can seem like the work that's being done in your life is your work, that you are the one affecting change.
And so maybe just one step back, offering you a very brief theology of what's really happening in your transformation.
It looks like this.
It's grace all the way down.
Grace.
It is God who is throwing those seeds out, whether you receive them or not.
That is God's grace.
It is God's grace that grows the plants within your soil.
You don't do that, right?
It is God's grace that turns the growth into actual fruit.
You don't do that either.
So what do you do?
Your job is maybe simplest yet.
You simply receive it with a willing heart, with a heart that has the right amended soil, that you open yourself to the work that God is trying to do in your life.
That, that is your work.
And then you allow God to do the work that God wants to do in your life.
It is grace all the way down, but your work is not just passive.
You're not just sitting there waiting for this to happen.
Your role is to tend the soil of your soul.
As I was preparing for this sermon, I thought, well, I should probably give some kind of nice story to illustrate how this works and what this looks like.
And then I thought, well, maybe I'll give a story about some famous person or maybe somebody that I knew.
And the more I sat with it, the more I thought it is important that I tell you something real, something that I know from my personal experience, something that is me.
So forgive me for a moment, but I do want to share with you like something very real
and a time in my life where transformation was both necessary and where it began to occur.
You've heard some of me, some of you have heard me talk about my years in Alabama and then the transition here into Northern Virginia.
And I don't want to go too far down that road because some of you have heard it too many times and you might be tired of it.
But I do want to offer you this
story from the perspective of transformation.
2016 was the year, and it has to be one of the most important years of my life because I look back on it as this hinge point in my own life's journey.
We were living in small town Alabama.
For perspective, I was 37.
I had three kids, ages eight, five, and Asher was a newborn.
I was working at least 60 hours a week at the college that I was teaching at.
And then on the weekends and midweek, I was preaching and teaching at Uniontown Baptist Church.
I was probably averaging four and a half to six hours of sleep at night.
We were isolated in a very small town.
We had no friends because they had either moved away or died.
And if you know me, you know that I have a seizure disorder.
And I have it under control most of the time, but by the end of those years, I was having one every other month, and it was becoming a real problem because of the stress of my life.
And I got to this point where my life was more or less felt like at a breaking point.
I had worked incredibly hard to build the life that I was living, but it felt like I was about to collapse under the weight of it all.
And my marriage was failing on top of all that.
The soil of my life in this time, what was it like?
It was certainly dry.
It was parched.
It was compacted like the path that Jesus describes in the parable.
From my vantage point now, looking back 10 years, I can say that
I'm certain that God was raining down seeds on the soil, that compacted soil of my life.
But in that moment of time, it did not feel that way.
It did not feel that way at all.
And why?
Well, because it was bouncing off the hardness of the soil of my life and the birds were coming and just eating it up,
And the wind was just sweeping it away.
And as much as I actually did want to hear from God, I did.
I desperately did.
I needed it.
The circumstances of my life, well, they had me in a very dry period.
So what happened next was grace upon grace.
I've already said that it's grace all the way down.
And so God is trying to reach out to me.
And he manages to, as some of you know, through a gift that Kendall gave to me.
The gift was simply sending me to a monastery for four days, where it was just me.
It was silence.
And I was able to just simply be.
And I was asking some really tough questions of God.
And I was journaling through that window of time.
And I realize now that the journals from those four days
perhaps the most important, one of the most important items that I own in life.
Because in that journal, I wrote down what I believed God was revealing to me in this moment, the ways in which God was trying to reach out to me.
And so I walked away with these six revelations.
That's what I wrote.
Revelation 1, they literally say, Revelation 1.
And then I kind of write in Revelation 2.
And I believed and to this day still believe that they were and that it was God like literally saying, you need to do these things.
But here's the thing.
When I look back on those revelations, they would maybe be surprising to most of you because they weren't spiritual, mostly spiritual in nature.
They're actually very physical.
They're very bodily.
They had everything to do with my sleep.
How much sleep I was getting.
They had everything to do with my routines.
What I was doing in the evenings and the mornings.
How much time I was spending with my family.
How much time I was spending alone.
What I was doing with my days and my hours.
This week or a couple weeks ago, rather, I came across a book called The Body Teaches the Soul by a guy named Justin Early.
I recommend this to you.
But I hate that this guy wrote this book because as I'm reading it, I'm thinking I should have written this book.
This is a book that is needed to be written for centuries, maybe.
And in some ways, the premise is quite simple.
It's that we often get things, well, it's not even upside down.
We just don't realize that the transformation goes both ways, which is to say we think that the transformation happens with some sort of spiritual or mental thing that happens with our lives.
And then that changes everything else.
And that's true.
It can and does sometimes.
But his point and what I would also want to say to you
is that the bodily life that we live, it too actually transforms the other direction.
And so he has chapters on like breathing, eating, drinking, sleeping, sickness and pain.
And his point there is maybe one that a lot of you can resonate with.
If you're in sickness or you're in pain and you're trying to be a spiritual person,
We'll just forget about it.
You suddenly realize you've come to your wits end and you're incapable of being the kind of spiritual person you want to be because your body is racked with pain.
If you're sleeping four and a half hours a night like I was in Alabama and you're expecting to hear from God, forget about it.
I think a lot of our spiritual growth is happening downstream from making sure that our bodies are actually taken care of.
And this is exactly what we find in, well, this book teaches that the body teaches the soul.
And so he talks a lot about exercise.
He even talks about sex if you need a reason to buy the book.
Technology.
and how it affects our spirits and our souls.
It took me personally getting to the point where I felt like my life was about to fall apart, like I was a speeding train about to fly off the tracks, to finally wake up and say, I need a change.
Something has to break.
It's time to get radical.
That was the beginning of a real change in my life.
a path toward abundance, but please do not misunderstand me.
Growth didn't immediately happen.
First, remember, it slept, sleep, and then it began to creep, and then it began to leap.
But it takes a while and take the time that it takes.
In closing, I would encourage you to find your why.
I think I've said this before, but maybe I haven't.
Find your why, because real change in your life requires motivation, some kind of motivating force that gets you out of your seat and actually says, all right, I'm gonna really do something this time.
In Alabama, for me, it was a burning platform
My life felt like at least it was falling apart and I needed to do something different.
I needed to get radical.
It was urgent.
It was pressing.
And so I had a why.
I knew exactly why I needed to do something different.
Then you might not be in that position, but you might be.
Maybe you've already got your why and it is loud and clear and it's time to do something about it.
But if you need a why,
Let me offer a few.
Maybe it's your kids.
The greatest gift that you can give your children is the healthiest you possible.
You can only give them of what you have.
And so if you are dry and parched and that path is beaten down or it's the the rocky soil and you're trying to give out of that, well, good luck.
The best thing that you can do for your kids is to have healthy soil, to have an abundant life and to give out of that.
Maybe it's your spouse, maybe a year ago or
five years ago or 50 years ago, you said, I do, and you made promises in front of a crowd of people, and you intend to keep those promises, and you want to love your spouse in sickness and in health, and you want to give your life away for them.
The best thing that you can do is to amend the soil of your life, to soften your heart,
to allow God to do some work in there and to start growing some things in abundance.
So that you have 30 times, 60 times, 100 times the abundance that you used to.
And now, now you can start feeding some people with that, including and especially your spouse.
Or maybe you're not married.
Maybe you're younger and you're just starting out in life.
And you're thinking to yourself, what's my why?
What's my why?
There is a version of you 10 years from now and 30 years from now, maybe even 70 years from now, chances on your life and you're thinking to yourself, I had chances to become what I needed to become.
Right now is an opportunity to say, I wanna amend the soil of my soul
I want to start putting nutrients into my soul.
I want to focus on the right things because I want to become a man or a woman of God.
Somebody who is feeding the masses with the abundance that he is doing in my soul.
That is a reason to wake up every morning and to do the right thing.
That is a why to live with.
fact.
God is the great sower of seeds and he is showering your life with seeds this very moment.
Fact, these seeds must be received with the right kind of soil and the challenge.
What kind of soil is in your heart right now?
Let's pray.
father.
We look around outside and though it is cold and we are all expecting a little snow today, we know that in just a few weeks, just a few weeks, there will be growth poking out of the ground and there will be new leaves
on the trees that look dead right now.
And the sun will be shining a little brighter and the temperatures will be warmer and the world will be coming back to life.
God now is the time to make decisions.
Decisions about the life we intend to lead.
Decisions about the soil sitting in our souls.
Soil that is either compacted, rocky, thorny, or by God's grace is good soil.
God, may we be people who choose the good.
May we nourish our souls with the nourishment that you give us.
May we amend that soil so that we might live lives
that are producing an abundant crop that only you are capable of producing.
You have put us here, each and every one of us.
You have put us here to feed the masses.
None of us are average people.
All of us have purpose.
All of us have been placed on this earth with tasks to do.
God, you have empowered us to do that task.
May we not shrink back from it, but may we be bold and step out in faith and be the kinds of people who live big lives for you, for your kingdom.
God, we pray all of this, Christ's Holy Spirit.